build-std: release candidate (#4)
davidtwco/rfcs: text/0000-build-std/4-build-std-always.md

# `build-std=always`

This part of the RFC proposes adding a `build-std = "always|never"` option to
the Cargo configuration which will unconditionally rebuild the standard library

> crates listed in a new `build-std-crates` option.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
crates listed in a new `build-std-crates` option. It also describes
how Cargo (or external tools) should build the standard library
crates on stable (i.e., which flags to pass and features to enable).
```

Something like that?

Author: Makes sense, added in 5121a0ac

This is aimed at supporting the following [motivations](./3-motivation.md):

- Building the standard library on a stable toolchain without Cargo
- Building standard library crates that are not shipped for a target
- Using the standard library with tier three targets

# Proposal
[proposal]: #proposal

Cargo configuration will contain a new key `build-std` under the `[build]`
section ([?][rationale-build-std-in-config]), permitting one of two values -
"never" ([?][rationale-build-std-never]) or "always", defaulting to "never":

```toml
[build]

> build-std = "always" # or `never`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
build-std = "never" # or `always`
```

Since that's the default.

Author: 👍 Changed in 00b3f8f0

> the Cargo packages for the standard library. As much of this configuration as
> possible should be moved to the Cargo profile for these packages so that the
> artifacts produced by build-std match the pre-built standard library as much
> as is feasible.

Alongside `build-std`, a `build-std-crate` key will be introduced
([?][rationale-build-std-crate]), which can be used to specify which crates from
the standard library should be built. Only "core", "alloc" and "std" are valid
values for `build-std-crate`.

```toml
[build]
build-std-crate = "std"
```

A value of "std" means that every crate in the graph has a direct dependency on
`std`, `alloc` and `core`. Similarly, "alloc" means `alloc` and `core`, and
"core" means just `core`.

If [*Standard library dependencies*][deps] are implemented then `builtin`
dependencies will be used if `build-std-crates` is not explicitly set.
Otherwise, `build-std-crate` will default to the crate intended to be supported
by the target (see later
[*Target standard library support*][target-standard-library-support] section).

If `std` is to be built and Cargo is building a test using the default test

> harness then Cargo will also build the `test` crate.

Reviewer: I'd recommend moving this 1 paragraph up, I missed this on the current read through and was left confused. Including this in the same place we discuss what the available options are seems to read more naturally to me.

Also, we probably mean 'building a test or a benchmark' here?

Author: Reworded and reordered in 3214dbae

- [*Why not build the standard library in incremental?*][rationale-incremental]
- [*Why not produce a `dylib` for the standard library?*][rationale-no-dylib]
- [*Why use `noprelude` with `--extern`?*][rationale-noprelude-with-extern]
- [*Why use the pre-built standard library for procedural macros and build scripts in host mode?*][rationale-host-deps-host]
- [*Why use the pre-built standard library for procedural macros and build scripts in cross-compile mode?*][rationale-host-deps-cross]

*See the following sections for relevant unresolved questions:*

- [*What should the `build-std` configuration in `.cargo/config` be named?*][unresolved-config-name]
- [*What should the "always" and "never" values of `build-std` be named?*][unresolved-config-values]
- [*What should `build-std-crate` be named?*][unresolved-build-std-crate-name]
- [*Should the standard library inherit RUSTFLAGS?*][unresolved-inherit-rustflags]

*See the following sections for future possibilities:*

- [*Allow reusing sysroot artifacts if available*][future-reuse-sysroot]

## Target standard library support
[target-standard-library-support]: #target-standard-library-support

> A new `standard_library_support` field is added to the target specification

Reviewer: IMO, support is a bad name for something that is a *default* and does not imply stability etc, based on the description here.

Could we rename this to 'target-recommended-standard-library' or 'target-default-standard-library'?

Author: Fixed in 02f8a08a

crate being compiled is within the same sysroot as the rustc binary being
invoked ([?][rationale-implied-bootstrap]). Cargo will not need to use
`RUSTC_BOOTSTRAP` when compiling the standard library with a stable toolchain.
The standard library's dependencies will not be permitted to use build probes to
detect whether a nightly version is being used.

*See the following sections for rationale/alternatives:*

- [*Why allow building from the sysroot with implied `RUSTC_BOOTSTRAP`?*][rationale-implied-bootstrap]

## Self-contained objects
[self-contained-objects]: #self-contained-objects

A handful of targets require linking against special object files, such as
`windows-gnu`, `linux-musl` and `wasi` targets. For example, `linux-musl`
targets require `crt1.o`, `crti.o`, `crtn.o`, etc.

Since [rust#76158]/[compiler-team#343], the compiler has a stable
`-Clink-self-contained` flag which will look for special object files in
expected locations, typically populated by the `rust-std` components. Its
behaviour can be forced by `-Clink-self-contained=true`, but is force-enabled
for some targets and inferred for others.

> Rust can start to ship `rust-self-contained` components for any targets which

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Rust will ship `rust-self-contained` components for any targets which
```

Author: Fixed in 428ce01c

missing special object files. rustc will attempt to detect when
`rust-self-contained` components are missing and provide helpful diagnostics in
this case.

`-Clink-self-contained` also controls whether rustc uses the linker shipped with
Rust. build-std's use of `-Clink-self-contained` will endeavour to ensure that
the whatever the default linker for the current target is (self-contained or
otherwise) will be used.

*See the following sections for future possibilities:*

- [*Enable local recompilation of special object files/sanitizer runtimes*][future-recompile-special]

## `compiler-builtins`
[compiler-builtins]: #compiler-builtins

`compiler-builtins` is always built with `-Ccodegen-units=10000` to force each
intrinsic into its own object file to avoid symbol clashes with libgcc. This is
currently enforced with a profile override in the standard library's workspace.

rustc will automatically use a large number of codegen units for the
`compiler-builtins` crate, unless manually specified using the `-Ccodegen-units`
flag (to support users, like Rust for Linux, that prefer a single codegen unit).
This prevents `compiler-builtins` from having to be special-cased in the

> standard library workspace.

Reviewer: I think we still need it special cased, because the default of using the standard library workspace's "dist" configuration would cause Cargo to pass -Ccodegen-units=1 to compiler-builtins compilation too.

Author: I think this is referring to the profile override mentioned in the previous paragraph, which is unnecessary due to this change. It might still be special-cased for the dist configuration, I think that's okay.

Reviewer: OK, so just to make sure we're on the same page. In Rust CI dist (+ test, IIRC) builds, we currently set `rust.codegen-units-std = 1` to make std more optimized. This sets a Cargo env variable to configure the profile we're running in (https://github.com/rust-lang/rust/blob/128b36a4a48534b048845cc744b9672529d13df1/src/bootstrap/src/core/builder/cargo.rs#L1296).

That presumably does not override the per-package setting in Cargo.toml (https://github.com/rust-lang/rust/blob/128b36a4a48534b048845cc744b9672529d13df1/library/Cargo.toml#L18).

The end result for our builds is that we have:

```
$ rustc -Ccodegen-units=100000 ... compiler_builtins/lib.rs
$ rustc -Ccodegen-units=1 ... std/lib.rs
```

In RfL's case they'd presumably own the rustc invocations for both so they can pass -Ccodegen-units=1 themselves rather than using Cargo's defaults... but then I don't see why we need rustc to special case anything. And if rustc *did* special case it still wouldn't help because we'd need to teach Cargo to **not** pass `-Ccodegen-units=<anything>`, right?

Author: Yeah, you're right, removed this part of the proposal in 7865b46c

> [!NOTE]
>
> [rust#135395] could be resurrected to implement this.

See [*Allow local builds of `compiler-rt` intrinsics*][future-compiler-builtins-c]
for discussion of the `compiler-builtins-c` feature.

### `compiler-builtins/mem`
[compiler-builtins-mem]: #compiler-builtinsmem

The `mem` feature of `compiler_builtins` (and the subsequent
`compiler-builtins-mem` feature of `core`, `alloc`, `std` which forward to
`compiler_builtins/mem`) will be inverted to a new feature named `external-mem`
([?][rationale-no-mem]). This will not be a default feature, so
`compiler_builtins` will provide mem symbols unless the `external-mem` is
provided.

`std`, which dynamically links to `libc`, will depend on the `external-mem`
feature. `no_std` users providing their own mem symbols can rely on weak linkage
to override the ones provided by `compiler_builtins` or provide the

> `external-mem` feature with an unstable feature in scenarios where weak linkage

Reviewer: I'm not sure what we mean by "with an unstable feature" here. I guess that's a top-level Cargo feature (in the https://doc.rust-lang.org/nightly/cargo/reference/unstable.html sense, not the --cfg sense)?

Author: Reworded this section in de662723

is not an option ([?][rationale-no-weak-linkage]).

*See the following sections for rationale/alternatives:*

- [*Why invert the `mem` feature?*][rationale-no-mem]
- [*Why not rely on weak linkage for `compiler-builtins/mem` symbols?*][rationale-no-weak-linkage]

## `profiler-builtins`
[profiler-builtins]: #profiler-builtins

`profiler-builtins` will not be built by build-std, thus preventing
profile-guided optimisation with a locally-built standard library.
`profiler-builtins` has native dependencies which may fail compilation of the
standard library if missing were `profiler-builtins` to be built by default as
part of the standard library build.

*See the following sections for future possibilities:*

- [*Allow building `profiler-builtins`*][future-profiler-builtins]

## Caching
[caching]: #caching

Standard library artifacts built by build-std will not be shared between crates
or workspaces, as they only exist in Cargo's target directory for a specific

> crate or workspace ([?][rationale-caching]).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Standard library artifacts built by build-std will be reused equivalently to
today's crates/dependencies that are built within a shared target directory.
By default, this limits sharing to a single workspace. ([?][rationale-caching]).
```

I assume something like this is what we meant, i.e., nothing special about std?

Author: That's what I intended, yeah, reworded in 98ec3e63

build-std:

[`cargo clean`][cargo-clean] will additionally delete any builds of the standard
library performed by build-std.

[`cargo fetch`][cargo-fetch] will not fetch the standard library dependencies as
they are already vendored in the `rust-src` component.

[`cargo miri`][cargo-miri] is not built into Cargo, it is shipped by miri, but
is mentioned in Cargo's documentation. `cargo miri` is unchanged by this RFC,
but build-std is one step towards `cargo miri` requiring less special support.

> [!NOTE]
>
> `cargo miri` could be re-implemented using build-std to enable a `miri`
> profile and always rebuild. The `miri` profile would be configured in the
> standard library's workspace, setting the flags/options necessary for `miri`.

[`cargo report`][cargo-report] will not include reports from the standard
library crates or their dependencies.

[`cargo update`][cargo-update] will not update the dependencies of `std`,
`alloc` and `core`, as these are vendored as part of the distribution of
`rust-src` and resolved separately from the user's dependencies. Neither will
`std`, `alloc` or `core` be updated, as these are unversioned and always match
the current toolchain version.

> [`cargo vendor`][cargo-vendor] will not vendor standard library dependencies.
> Vendoring these and using them later would effectively pin the crate to the
> version of the language and toolchain used when vendoring was performed (as the
> vendored standard library source would only work with that toolchain version).
> Standard library crates are already vendored in the `rust-src` component, so do
> not require network access once downloaded.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[`cargo vendor`][cargo-vendor] will not vendor the standard library crates or their dependencies.
These are pre-vendored as part of the `rust-src` component ([?][rationale-vendoring]).
```

IMO this is simpler and avoids ambiguity around what exactly is in the vendored sources.

Author: Adopted this wording in 8f82df45

- [`cargo pkgid`][cargo-pkgid]
- [`cargo publish`][cargo-publish]
- [`cargo search`][cargo-search]
- [`cargo tree`][cargo-tree]
- [`cargo uninstall`][cargo-uninstall]
- [`cargo version`][cargo-version]
- [`cargo yank`][cargo-yank]

## Stability guarantees
[stability-guarantees]: #stability-guarantees

build-std enables a much greater array of configurations of the standard library
to exist and be produced by stable toolchains than the single configuration that
is distributed today.

It is not feasible for the Rust project to test every combination of profile
configuration, Cargo feature, target and standard library crate. As such, the
stability of build-std as a mechanism must be separated from the stability
guarantees which apply to configurations of the standard library it enables.

For example, while a stable build-std mechanism may permit the standard library
to be built for a tier three target, the Rust project continues to make no
commitments or guarantees that the standard library for that target will
function correctly or build at all. Even on a tier one target, the Rust project
cannot test every possible variation of the standard library that build-std
enables.

> The tier of a target no longer determines whether the availability of the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The tier of a target no longer determines the possibility of using the
```

Since it does still determine the availability of pre-built artifacts, right?

Author: It does, yeah - changed in 428ce01c

Always using a locally-built standard library avoids the complexity associated
with an automatic build-std mechanism while still being useful for users of tier
three targets. By leaving an automatic mechanism for a later RFC, fewer of the
technical challenges of build-std need to be addressed all at once.

Having an opt-in mechanism initially, such as `build-std = "always"`, allows for
early issues with build-std to be ironed out without potentially affecting more
users like an automatic mechanism. Later proposals will extend the `build-std`
option with an automatic mechanism.

↩ [*Proposal*][proposal]

## Why does "always" rebuild in release profile?
[rationale-release-profile]: #why-does-always-rebuild-in-release-profile

The release profile most closely matches the existing pre-built standard
library, which has proven itself suitable for a majority of use cases.

By minimising the differences between a newly-built std and a pre-built std,
there is less chance of the user experiencing bugs or unexpected behaviour from
the well-tested and supported pre-built std. Later proposals will extend the

> `build-std` option with customised standard library builds.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
the well-tested and supported pre-built std.
```

Given inheritance of RUSTFLAGS, IMO this is already the case, there's no 'later' about it.

Author: Clarified what I meant here in 77929caf

build-std = "never" # or `always`
```

The `build-std` configuration locations have the following precedence
([?][rationale-build-std-precedence]):

1. `[target.<triple>]`
2. `[target.<cfg>]`
3. `[build]`

As the Cargo configuration is local to the current user (typically in
`.config/cargo.toml` in the project root and/or Cargo home directory), the value
of `build-std` is not influenced by the dependencies of the current crate.

When `build-std` is set to "always", then the standard library will be
unconditionally recompiled ([?][rationale-unconditional]) in the release profile
defined in its workspace as part of every clean build
([?][rationale-release-profile]). This is primarily useful for users of tier
three targets. As with other dependencies, the standard library's build will
respect the `RUSTFLAGS` environment variable.

> [!NOTE]
>
> Configuration of the pre-built standard library is split across bootstrap and
> the Cargo packages for the standard library. As much of this configuration as
> possible should be moved to the Cargo profile for these packages so that the
> artifacts produced by build-std match the pre-built standard library as much
> as is feasible.

> Alongside `build-std`, a `build-std-crate` key will be introduced

Reviewer 2: All of the documents are inconsistent of whether or not `build-std-crates` is plural. Can you go through and make sure they are all in sync? I would recommend making it plural.

```suggestion
Alongside `build-std`, a `build-std-crates` key will be introduced
```

Author: Fixed, changed to `build-std-crates` throughout in 7394a1ba

- [*Allow reusing sysroot artifacts if available*][future-reuse-sysroot]

## Default standard library crate for targets
[default-std-crate-for-target]: #default-standard-library-crate-for-targets

A new `default_build_std_crate` field is added to the target specification
([?][rationale-target-spec-purpose]), replacing the existing `metadata.std`
field.

This field determines whether the corresponding crate is intended to be able to
be built for that target. It will be set to one of three values, as appropriate
for the target: "core", "core and alloc" or "core, alloc and std".

For example, `default_build_std_crate` will be set to "core, alloc and std" on
"aarch64-unknown-linux-gnu", as all of the standard library crates are supported
on this target, and only "core" on "aarch64-unknown-none", as this is the only
standard library crate that is supported on this target.

Cargo's `build-std-crate` field will default to the value of the
`default_build_std_crate` field (`std` for "core, alloc and std", `alloc` for
"core and alloc", and `core` for "core"). This does not prevent users from
building more crates than the default, it is only intended to be a sensible

> default for the target that is probably what the user expects.

Reviewer 2: I'm a little concerned about the user experience here when a user explicitly sets the crates with build-std-crates, or in the explicit-dependencies step. There are a few different failure modes:

- Build wants std for a no-std target that doesn't support std (compile errors):
    - Today (no build-std, target installed): You get `error[E0463]: can't find crate for std` with a helpful note that the target may not support std, and to consider using `#![no_std]`.
    - Today with `-Zbuild-std=std` (intended): You're supposed to get an error with [this message](https://github.com/rust-lang/rust/blob/94ecb52bbeeccc990545d4ebc9e9c35dcaf285e3/library/std/src/lib.rs#L225-L227) that explains the target doesn't support std.
    - Today with `-Zbuild-std=std` (actual): It was broken a while back, and now you get a large number of errors building alloc, with various cfg and resolver errors.
    - With this proposal: I think you'll get the same behavior, with a large number of confusing errors.
- Build wants std for a no-std target that does compile successfully (due to the "unsupported" module):
    - Today (no build-std, target installed): You get `error[E0463]: can't find crate for std` with a helpful note that the target may not support std, and to consider using `#![no_std]`.
    - Today with `-Zbuild-std=std` (intended): You're supposed to get an error with [this message](https://github.com/rust-lang/rust/blob/94ecb52bbeeccc990545d4ebc9e9c35dcaf285e3/library/std/src/lib.rs#L225-L227) that explains the target doesn't support std.
    - With this proposal: The target just builds without an error or warning that this configuration is not intended. This will implicitly stabilize the target's support beyond the tier that is intended.

Would it be possible to avoid these two failure modules with better behavior?

For both of these, I would expect a clear error message that the target doesn't support the given crate (alloc or std), without spitting out pages of other errors.

For the second one, we may need a nightly-only escape hatch. We've had a few targets that have incrementally migrated to supporting std. During that transition period, std is in various states of functionality, but the target itself has not yet stabilized or committed to supporting std. I'm not sure on whether or not that is actually necessary.

Author: I'm definitely open to making a change here - the very first early drafts had a much stricter check, and it sounds like we want something closer to that.

It'll require a bit of thought as to how to frame this because it involves a bunch of things - whether a crate should build for a given target depends on if we want to consider that crate "stable" for that target, if that depends on the target tier, or just completeness, as well as whether we do want some targets to default to only core but permit building alloc/std, etc.

Author: We discussed this in the sync call, I think I've wrote what we discussed in 
9719228

today's crates/dependencies that are built within a shared target directory. By
default, this limits sharing to a single workspace ([?][rationale-caching]).

*See the following sections for rationale/alternatives:*

- [*Why not globally cache builds of the standard library?*][rationale-caching]

## Generated documentation
[generated-documentation]: #generated-documentation

When running `cargo doc` for a project to generate documentation and rebuilding
the standard library, the generated documentation for the user's crates will
link to the locally generated documentation for the `core`, `alloc` and `std`
crates, rather than the upstream hosted generation as is typical for non-locally
built standard libraries.

*See the following sections for rationale/alternatives:*

- [*Why not link to hosted standard library documentation in generated docs?*][rationale-generated-docs]

## Cargo subcommands
[cargo-subcommands]: #cargo-subcommands

As opaque dependencies, any Cargo command which accepts a package spec with `-p`
will only additionally recognise `core`, `alloc` and `std` and none of their
dependencies. Many of Cargo's subcommands will need modification to support

> build-std:

Reviewer 3: Should `-p` support be left to "Explicit dependencies"?  As is, this phase doesn't require any special integration of build-std into how we treat dependencies until we get to this part.  Not saying it can't be done at this phase but feels like it should be left to the implementation while required for "Explicit dependencies".

Author: Makes sense to me, changed in 47e90e873239a5efc6b1f9eabf6c952d8f8953a8
